---
layout: post
title: "Meditations on the Consequences of Free Will's Existence Or Lack Thereof"
subtitle: ""
author: Alejandro Londono
date: 2022-07-30 00:30:00 +0000
categories: [blogposts, reading]
---

Many a person in history has written extensively on the nature of free will. Much of this writing puts particular focus on its existence. Entire religions revolve around these ideas. Though plenty have tried to prove whether or not free will exists, I'm not sure that anyone is capable of it. However, it seems to me, that,regardless of it's existence, we have no other choice but to behave as if its does.

Proof for the existence of free will is fundamentally a physics problem. If the universe is deterministic then free will does not exist. The laws of physics, when given an input corresponding to the initial conditions of the universe, would therein compute every event that has ever and will ever transpire. This function will output every event exactly as it has happened and exactly as it will happen, every time. This includes every action and every decision made by every human being ever. The most straightforward way to disprove free will is to prove that the universe is deterministic. 

If in fact, the universe is not deterministic, there is room for the idea of free will to exist. In order to then disprove free will you would have to move up a level in abstractions and discuss the implications of biology on a human's ability to self-determine behavior. One might ask, does the dog choose to chase the squirrel? The answer seems to be, "Probably not. It's an instinctive reaction". It follows to ask, does man too chase squirrels? Most certainly. But man believes himself to have the ability to override and overcome instinct. This discussion would continue diving deeper into biology and philosphy leading to ideas around consciousness and what differentiates man from animal. It becomes a game of pong bouncing from the biological to the theological to the spiritual back to the biological.

In reality it does not ultimately matter if we have the ability to self-determine our actions and the direction of our lives. We will act as if we can. 

If this seems incorrect let's assume that free will does not exist. Let's also assume that we can prove that it does not exist.

A large percentage of the population would either passionately oppose the idea (many for religious reasons) or not care at all. These groups would continue to live their lives as if they still have free will. They would deny or refute any proof presented or simply ignore it. There would be no change in their behavior as a result. 

The other portion of the population would accept the proof. Some would have already believed this to be true and would continue their lives as if nothing had changed. Many, however, would not internalize this idea in a peaceful manner. It would likely create a violent internal conflict within them. 

They would start by denying it. It would not make sense to them. They made decisions everyday. How could that not be an extension of their free will? 

Next, paralysis. Their knowledge of a lack of free will would pervade their mind. Every time they went to make a decision, they would remember that they had not actually decided anything. They did not have free will. This would result in them freezing, at least temporarily, during the process of making that decision. This paralysis would come from their internal inability to reconcile feeling as if the decision was theirs to make with the verifiable evidence that it was not. Did they actually want to do what they were about to do right at that moment? 

Subsequently, this would evoke rebellion. In an attempt to sieze back control of their autonomy, our character would take actions that became more and more erratic, contradictory, and out of character. To break their paralysis, they would perform the opposite of whatever action they had originally decided on. They would feel that this allows them to take back control of their free will. "Whatever determined that I would make decision (a) has just been thwarted for I have now decided on (b)."

Perhaps for some, this will make them think they had regained their free will. They could then forget about the proven fact of their lack thereof, and would spend the rest of their lives behaving as if they have somehow regained their free will. 

Others would return to the proof, however. They would realize that changing from action (a) to action (b) may have felt like their own decision, but ultimately even that was predetermined. The reaction to a lack of free will itself was predetermined by the mechanisms of predetermination. No decision they had made or would ever make would ever be their own. 

Perhaps some would accept this and go back to living their lives as normal. Ultimately they would behave as if their decisions were in fact an act of their own free will; a denial of sorts. 

For others, it would exacerbate their crisis. Their acts of rebellion would escalate and the conflict within would spill out into the outside world. Real world violence would result. Man would perform violent acts on his fellow man. By and large, however, man would perform violent acts against himself, with the final self-violent act being suicide. 

Violence is the ultimate imposition of will upon the world. Man on man violence imposes one man's will on another, violating the second man's autonomy, but re-affirming that of the first. The scale of violence would be tragic. 

Equally tragic are the suicides that would result from this feeling of autonomic loss. Many a man would refuse to commit acts of violence against others even in the face of an internal conflict in dire need of an outlet. After enough conflicting moments of trying to feel in control of their own decision, man would try to take back control of his autonomy by making the ultimate decision. Suicide would be seen as the utlimate act of control over one's own life. It's a paradoxical idea. Every instinct and action we take at a deeply biological and psychological level is to ensure our own survival. Every fiber of our being fights the idea of suicide. It is among the most difficult acts man can perform. If every fiber of one's being resists an action, then performing it would feel like the ultimate act of autonomy in a pre-determined world. Man would identify the resistance to suicide as the very fabric of pre-determination itself trying to direct them back to the path chosen for them. In an attempt to regain control, and perhaps even escape his internal torture, man will follow through with the action, ending his own life. The paradox comes from the fact that despite feeling as if this action is a choice and an act of regaining control, it is in fact not. In a pre-determined world, that was always the ending our character was meant to have and no control was regained whatsoever. 

There will be a subclass of the violent that will think beyond the action though, finally gaining a realization of the mechanics of life. Even if they follow through with the suicidal act, despite the feeling of control some thinks it brings, if no free will exists, they were always pre-determined to perform that action. Therefore the idea that it was their choice to end their life is an illusory extension of self delusion. If they can internalize and accept that no matter what action they take, whether upon another or upon themselves, it will never be their own, they will live.  Some cannot accept this idea, however, and will continue on the suicidal path. But those that do will set aside their violence and seek a way to find internal peace in a non-deterministic world. The only way to do so will be to continue through life, making decisions pretending as if they are their own. They will live in a world without free will as if free will exists. 

Ultimately, in the event that free will does not exist. The best option seems to be to skip all the violence and land at the conclusion: to simply continue living as if lacking free will exists. Although the violence might in fact be unaviodable.

Therefore whether it exists or not the only course of action we seem to have in order to not fall into a state of violent behavior is to behave as if free will exists.

If free will does exist, then life continues as it always has. It seems that whether free will exists or not, we have no choice but to act as if it does. 