---
layout: post
title: "Heroes"
subtitle: ""
author: Alejandro Londono
date: 2022-01-02 00:30:00 +0000
categories: [blogposts]
---

The ideal mythological or religious character is far more powerful and long lasting than a verifiably historical one because of the inevitable fall from grace of the historical figure as society’s values change and drift away from those the historical figure had. the mythological figure can more easily be re-adapted and modified to fit the current time, retaining the ideal to strive towards. Whereas the historical can not be changed without taking on significant risk that evidence of wrong doing should appear, which eventually it will. The difficulty  lies in the fact  that we long for mythological heroes rooted in reality, someone we can grasp and understand and strive to be like. But their mortality and humanity, which roots them to our reality, comes with imperfections, mistakes, and sins, as it does for us all, which can only inevitably lead to a destruction of the ideal and disillusionment. The mythological hero, on the other hand, your Jesus Christs, your Platonic heroes, can be stripped of imperfections and crafted into an ideal to strive for. Our ideal heroes are necessary, much like the religions they conceive, due to the values they impart and their longevity for imparting those values. And they are also necessary for taking on the roles we so dearly wish our mortal heroes to take on, that they will forever disappoint us in doing. This is especially important to keep in mind in order to ground our mortal heroes back to reality in order to find a way to forgive their shortcomings, or at the very least continue to celebrate their accomplishments in spite of their sins. Our mortal hero serves an even greater role than the ideal in that it proves to us that greatness is still possible even with the imperfections we must carry. The evil that men do lives after them, the good is oft interred with their bones. The mortal hero’s shortcomings should not be forgotten and often not forgiven, but the good they provide should not be forgotten either. Does a doing a good act undo a wrong one previously committed? Does doing a wrong act undo the good?

Martin Luther King cheated on his wife

George Washington and Thomas Jefferson owned slaves

Abraham Lincoln made some legally and ethically questionable decisions when exercising his power and freeing the slaves; even arguing that he was not freeing them because it was the right thing to do, rather because he needed to to win the war

Jesus Christ died for our sins. In a figurative sense, his existence as an ideal hero allows for the existence of flawed historic heroes. In an unconventional sense, He takes on the burden of being perfect so that we may be free to make mistakes. 
